---
layout: post
topics: pydy gsoc-2011 sympy
title: GSoC, Week 8
---

I don't have as much to talk about this week, as I spent two days in travel.
Mostly, I worked on the sphinx documentation for mechanics. I am continuing
with the previous organization of the documentation: first the mathematical
descriptions, then the SymPy implementations. I'm still not convinced that this
is the best way to do things, but at the moment, at least the subsubmodule's
documentation is consistent. Also, there will most likely be changes to the
code, probably relating to the switch to using Brian Granger's functional
derivative branch and the different printing. I'm also trying to use the same
examples in both the mathematical sections and in the code sections. I think
this is the most logical approach, and if I choose to rearrange the
documentation, I won't have to rewrite much. This is all in my 'pydy' branch.

The other thing I am working on is forming the equations of motion for the
bicycle. Right now they are being computed, but I'm not sure of the accuracy.
There are already tests in place for holonomic systems, but non for
non-holonomic systems ([for reference](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nonholonomic_system)
). Unfortunately, the equations for non-holonomic systems get very, very big.
In our lab, with the bicycle, we form our equations, linearize them, substitute
in the system parameters, and examine the eigenvalues in order to validate our
equations. I'm currently using my SymPy code to do this with the bicycle model,
but am encountering some difficulties. I've got the mass matrix and forcing
terms solved for and linearized, and the udots have a solution, in the form
udot = A x, where x = [q2,q4,q5,u2,u3,u5,u1,u4,u6].T . What should happen next
is that the relevant entries from this matrix are extracted, as our final state
is [u2,u5,q2,q5] \(this is lean rate, steer rate, lean angle, steer angle\), then
a smaller matrix is constructed and the eigenvalues are examined. Now, I know
that the eigenvalues are off already. Examining this "A" matrix though shows
that some of the elements are correct, compared to a reference "A" matrix. It
would appear that the partial derivative of the udots w.r.t. the lean angle and
lean rate are correct, but are not right w.r.t. the steer angle and steer rate.
I'm not sure how to interpret this, as it is showing that half of the correct
numbers are there (and these are correct to ~13 significant digits when
evaluated numerically), and the other half are wrong. I'm hoping that I have
just performed the linearization wrong, or the order in which I have arranged
my matrices is incorrect; I don't see many other options.

The full equations come out in the form: MM udot = forcing, or the mass matrix
multiplied by the time derivatives of the generalized speeds equals the forcing
terms. MM is 6x6, and forcing is 6x1 (as is udot). What is done next is
substitute in the current state into the mass matrix, find the jacobian of the
forcing vector w.r.t. the vector x (from above), and substitute in the
numerical values. Next, udot is found by performing MM.inv() * forcing (where
forcing is now a 6x9 matrix). Since I am getting some of the correct values, it
would appear that there are elements in both the MM and the forcing matrix
which are correct. I'm going to continue to play around with things, as again,
I feel that I am most likely assembling these things in the incorrect order.
Hopefully this will prove successful though, and will provide a good,
non-trivial example of what physics.mechanics can do.
