---
layout: post
topics: pydy gsoc-2011 sympy
title: GSoC, Week 4
---

Things went pretty well this week.  Last weekend, I implemented a Dyad class.
We decided to do this for a number of reasons; but largely it was to allow the
end-user the freedom to express a body's rotational inertia as sums of
components in different frames.  More information about dyads can be found
here: [Dyadics](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dyadics), or in Kane's 1985 book:
Dynamics, Theory and Applications.  A dyad (or dyadic, I guess?) represents the
juxtaposition of two vectors.  My experience with dyadics has involved treating
them as a matrix, basically; but implementing this class showed me some cool
things they can do. I also made a pretty simple convenience function for
creating an inertia dyadic by supplying 3 or 6 scalar values and a frame; this
will allow users to treat the inertia dyadic like they would treat the inertia
tensor; but they could still write the more complicated Dyad expressions out if
they wanted.  Also, the outer product was implemented for Vector, allowing for
easy creation of Dyads.

So, Dyad was the last main class which is used to describe physical
parameters/quantities/etc. After that, RigidBody and Particle classes were
made.  Luke and I discussed how we implement Kane's Method when doing it by
hand, and realized that basically we do all of the kinematics, then just write
down tables for storing the partial velocities and forces.  We both came to the
realization that the terms "particle" and "rigid body" were nothing more than
associating a mass/inertia with a point/frame, and that forces are really just
a Vector associated with a Point or ReferenceFrame.  So, we decided to make
RigidBody and Particle container classes effectively, where they both have
attributes (and getters/setters for sanitizing input) for all their relevant
information.  Then, I decided that storage of forces didn't have to be anything
more than a list of tuples, in the form (point/frame, force/torque).  I think
we'll make some more convenience functions here, probably relating to
gravitational forces.

Finally, Kane's Method.  Luke has done a lot of thinking about this, so a lot
of credit goes to him for the successful implementation of this.  When one does
Kane's Method by hand (or at least when I do it), I follow a series of steps;
something along the lines of:

Set up generalized coordinates and speeds
Do kinematics
List forces
Form relevant partial velocities
Calculate Fr, Fr*
Rewrite in desired form

So, I've basically written a class which stores the relevant information as you
go through these steps. Here's a little example:

```python
KM = Kane(N)
KM.gen_speeds([u1, u2, u3, u4, u5, u6])
KM.kindiffeq(kd)
KM.dependent_speeds([u1, u4, u6], conl)
fr = KM.form_fr(FL)
frstar = KM.form_frstar(BL)
```

First, you create the object specifying the inertia frame.  Then you supply the
generalized speeds and kinematic differential equations, which relate all of
the q's (gen. coords.) to u's (gen. speeds) by means of qdot = f(u).  This is
stored in a dictionary, and I need to figure out a better/easier way for the
user to generate these for bodies oriented by Euler Angles (perhaps another
convenience function?).  Fr is the generalized active force, and is formed from
the list of forces/points and their partial velocities, Fr* is the generalized
inertia force, and is formed from the list of particles/bodies and their
partial velocities.

Something that Luke has thought about for a while is dealing with nonholonomic
systems; these are systems with velocities constraints (example: ideal skate,
where it can move forward and backward and it can yaw, but never move left and
right).  Kane describes it in his 1985 book, but it's a little unclear; the way
Luke has described is the same thing, but a little easier conceptually.  This
will get described in a lot more detail in the documentation for PyDy.  One
other cool thing which I wanted to implement (so I did) was dealing with
systems with time varying mass.  Newton's second equation (f = m a) is really f
= d/dt (m v); or force = time derivative of linear momentum.  This also extends
to angular momentum/torques.  I make sure to check the time derivative of the
mass or inertia, and if it is zero, do things the "normal" way; if it is time
varying, I calculate the momenta and take the time derivatives thereof.  So, my
code should work with systems with non-constant mass/inertia.  Finally, one
more cool thing.  Sometimes, a system will be defined by parameters which are
time-varying, but not dynamics (ie user-specified speeds or positions or such).
These will be defined as DynamicSymbols instead of Symbols.  Then, when there
are DynamicSymbols which are not generalized speeds or coordinates, the code
will find and identify them.  The plan is for the SciPy output code to have
empty functions for these parameters for the user to then fill in.  One thing I
haven't thought about (mainly because I have never done any examples) is
flexible dynamic systems; I'd really like for my code to work with flexible
systems, but I'll need to try a few first.  Hopefully it will transfer nicely
into the framework I have built so nothing new will have to be implemented.

So basically, Kane's Method has been written.  The functionality that was
supposed to be complete this week was supposed to include SciPy code
generation, but I'm a little behind due to my late start.  I feel like I've
made a good amount of progress though...... The schedule for next week has
creation of equations of motion unittests, so I'll probably work out a bunch of
examples (or take them from Kane's book) and implement them as tests, in
addition to implementing SciPy code generation.  The week after is integration
into SymPy, so I'll probably start talking to Aaron this week about that.  Then
it's examples, documentation and LaTeX output.  Next week I'll have some
examples of generated EoM to show.
