---
layout: post
topics: pydy gsoc-2011 sympy
title: GSoC, Week 7
---

I submitted my pull request a little while ago for my code. Currently, it looks
like I'm waiting on a few things. I think the biggest thing is the pull request
Brian Granger has opened. I've already written a branch which uses his code,
and everything works. I just have to wait for his pull request to get accepted
in order to switch what is in my pull request. Then of course, that has to get
approved. This delay has had some positive benefits though.

Working with other people's branches has definitely helped my familiarity and
confidence with using git. Using the fetch and merge commands with multiple
remotes, along with getting merge errors and fixing them, has given some me
good experience. Also, rebasing to play with commit history, and amending
commits has been helpful.

I feel like I had the functionality I wanted before from my 'DynamicSymbol'
class, but with the ability to take the derivatives of functions now, with
respect to functions means that this object is no longer needed really. What I
did before was have 'DynamicSymbol' extend 'Symbol'. I then used the ability of
the 'symbols' function to to supply my own class for creation in the
'dynamicsymbols':

```python
def dynamicsymbols(names):
    """Wraps sympy.symbols to use DynamicSymbol. """
    return symbols(names, cls=DynamicSymbol)
```

This was an OK solution. Now though, one can use functions to represent these
time varying quantities; instead of q1, q1d, q1dd we'll have q1(t),
Derivative(q1(t), t), etc. This is certainly more consistent with the rest of
SymPy. Now my 'dynamicsymbols' function uses symbols with 'cls=Function' to
create a number of undefined function objects, which then are called with '(t)'
as an argument (I actually do something like dynamicsymbols.\_t = Symbol('t').
This way the time value is specified in only one place, but that place is still
associated with dynamic symbols. The ability of Python to set an attribute to a
function is certainly interesting...). I also added the ability to specify the
level of differentiation; you can call:

```python
In [11]: dynamicsymbols('q1 q2')
(q1, q2)

In [12]: dynamicsymbols('q1 q2', 1)
(q1', q2')
```

This means you can't create q1, q1', q1'' on one line, but at least all dynamic
symbols of the same level of differentiation can be called together. The above
snippet leads to the next topic though: printing.

When you start up ipython, and do the following:

```python
In [1]: from sympy.physics.mechanics import *

In [2]: dynamicsymbols('q1 q2', 1)
Out[2]: (Derivative(q1(t), t), Derivative(q2(t), t))
```

the output isn't actually the same as what I presented a few lines above. This
is because of the default printing of Derivative (shown in the line immediately
above). When dealing with multibody dynamics problems, you get a lot of
derivatives of these dynamic symbols (generalized coordinates and speeds). It
gets out of control pretty fast if we print out every time derivative in the
above form. So, what I did was to write my own printer which shows derivatives
as q' instead of Derivative(q(t), t), under certain conditions (and q'' for
Derivative(q(t),t,t) and so forth). The conditions are that that the derivative
has to have been taken with respect to the time symbol (stored in
dynamicsymbols.\_t, as previously mentioned) and that its first argument (the
value which is being differentiated) has to be an 'UndefinedFunction' and that
the derivative can only be taken with respect to t.

```python
    def _print_Derivative(self, e):
        from sympy.core.function import UndefinedFunction
        t = dynamicsymbols._t
        if (bool([i == t for i in e.variables]) &
            isinstance(type(e.args[0]), UndefinedFunction)):
            ol = str(e.args[0].func)
            for i, v in enumerate(e.variables):
                ol += '\''
            return ol
        else:
            return StrPrinter().doprint(e)
```

The above block of code shows how it is done; the first part of the undefined
function function is added to our output string (e.args[0].func), then for each
entry in e.variables we print a '. In this method, 'e' is the expression to be
printed. Then our final list is returned, or just the normal printer's output
if the given expression did not meet our criteria. Now, this actually doesn't
print out everything perfectly:

```python
In [23]: Derivative(q1,t)
q1'

In [24]: Derivative(q1*x,t)
Derivative(x*q1(t), t)

In [25]: Derivative(q1*x,t, evaluate=True)
x*q1'
```

We can still get examples where it prints out the long way: when evaluate is
not true and the 'Derivative' object does not only contain an undefined
function. I'm willing to live with this at the moment though, as I think that
all my code uses 'diff' where evaluate always gets called. I also wrote a
'\_print\_Function' method, in order to print q1(t) as q1:

```
def _print_Function(self, e):
    from sympy.core.function import UndefinedFunction
    t = dynamicsymbols._t
    temp = StrPrinter().doprint(e)
    if isinstance(type(e), UndefinedFunction):
        return temp.replace('(t)', '')
    return temp
```

I think this one is even simpler. If the Function is an undefined function,
print it to a string, then replace the '(t)' in the string with nothing.
Checking that it is an undefined function is definitely important, otherwise
you get:

```python
In [10]: cos(t)
cos
```

And I don't think anyone wants that. So the last two bits of this are
interactive printing and integration of my non-SymPy objects with the printing
system.

In order to get my Vector and and Dyad to print out with a SymPy printer
correctly, I had to do the following: have one method (I chose \_\_str\_\_)
which creates the string representation of the object, and then set
\_\_repr\_\_ = \_\_str\_\_, \_sympystr = \_\_str\_\_, \_sympyrepr =
\_\_str\_\_. Those last two functions are what the printer looks for, I
believe. I'm actually still not completely clear on the difference between repr
and str in Python, but I think one is supposed to satisfy: x == eval(repr(x)),
except that I'm not sure if it is repr or str there. Additionally, in doctests,
unless you do print, a returned value which you check against is called with
repr I believe. SymPy does not exactly follow the above obj=eval(repr(obj)),
and now, my code doesn't always either, which I think is an acceptable tradeoff
considering the readability issues. The way that the printer (which currently
only has \_print\_Derivative and \_print\_Function methods overridden) is used by
vector is as follows: the string value of a vector's non-zero measure number is
obtained with MechanicsStrPrinter().doprint(ar[i][0]). Here ar[i][0] is what I
am supplying, but whatever is put in .doprint() will be printed by the printer.

Now for most of the work in physics.mechanics, you'll be dealing with Vector
quantities, so my printer is used automatically. But at the end of forming
Kane's equations, you are left with Fr + Fr* = 0. This is a r x 1 vector
represented by a SymPy Matrix of the same shape. It will also be full of qdots
and udots (generalized coordinate and speed time derivatives). This can end up
being the biggest expression generated in forming the equations of motion, so
being concise where it is practical is a good idea. Unfortunately my printer
won't get called here, because Matrix uses the default StrPrinter. Enter the
display hook:

```python
def mechanics_printing():
    def mydhook(ar):
        print MechanicsStrPrinter().doprint(ar)
    sys.displayhook = mydhook
    return 'displayhook set'
```

This function, mechanics\_printing(), will be called by the user at the
beginning of an interactive session in order to print out Derivatives and
Functions which are not part of a mechanics Vector in the way I have chosen.
You can set sys.displayhook to use a custom printing function of your creation.
Here, a one line function to just use my printer is defined, then the system
displayhook is set to use my displayhook. At this point I learned there is no
such thing as a "void"  function in Python; everything has to return a value,
and if you don't, None is automatically returned. I just had it print that the
displayhook was set, rather than it printing 'None' when you call this
function. I believe this only sets the interactive printing though; I'm not
sure what will be printed when you have a script file you have written and it
prints out the screen or a file; this still needs to be worked out.

Hopefully all of this will help out someone in the future with their SymPy
printing issues.
